YARP 2.3.65 (2016-05-13) Release Notes
======================================

A (partial) list of bug fixed and issues resolved in this release can be found
[here](https://github.com/robotology/yarp/issues?q=label%3A%22Fixed+in%3A+YARP+2.3.65%22)

Important Changes
-----------------

* YARP is now automatically installed with the RPATH enabled.
  This can be disabled by setting the `CMAKE_SKIP_RPATH` or
  `CMAKE_SKIP_INSTALL_RPATH` variables.
* The `portmonitor` can now be built without LUA and uses YARP plugins system
  of having to locate the shared libraries manually.



Bug Fixes
---------

### YARP_OS

* Fixed memory leaks when building with c++11.
* Fixed `yarp::os::Thread::getKey()` method for c++11.
* Fixed race condition in `yarp::os::Thread::getKey()`.




New Features
------------

### YARP_OS

* `ResourceFinder::configure(argc,argv,bool)` accepts a third optional parameter
  to keep/skip the first command line argument


### yarprobotinterface

The `robotInterface` tool in
[robotology/icub-main](https://github.com/robotology/icub-main/) was imported
in YARP with a few non compatible changes:

* `robotInterface` was renamed `yarprobotinterface` to follow the convention
  with yarp executables
* The RPC port opened is now /<robotname>/yarprobotinterface
* The default `.ini` file name is now `yarprobotinterface.ini`
* The DTD line for XML files is now
```xml
<!DOCTYPE [...] PUBLIC "-//YARP//DTD yarprobotinterface 1.0//EN" "http://www.yarp.it/DTD/yarprobotinterfaceV1.0.dtd">
```

### yarpmanager++

A new `yarpmanager++` tool which merges the functionalities of the `yarpmanager`
and `yarpbuilder` was added.


Deprecated Features
-------------------

### YARP_OS

* `yarp::os::Module` is now deprecated in favour of `yarp::os::RFModule`.
* `YARP_ASSERT` is now deprecated in favour of `yAssert`.

### YARP_dev

* The following YARP methods have been deprecated:
  - iPositionControl::setPositionMode()
  - iVelocityControl::setVelocityMode()
  - iTorqueControl::setTorqueMode()
  - iOpenLoopControl::setOpenLoopMode()

### Devices
* `controlboard` and `clientcontrolboard` devices are now deprecated in favour
  of `controlboardwrapper2` and `remote_controlboard`.

### Tools
* `yarpserver2` and `yarpserver3` are now considered deprecated and will be
  removed in the next release.

### GUIs
* All guis based on GTK2 are now considered deprecated and will be removed in
  the next release.
