YARP 3.8.0 (2023-03-02)                                                {#v3_8_0}
==================

[TOC]

YARP 3.8.0 Release Notes
===================

A (partial) list of bug fixed and issues resolved in this release can be found
[here](https://github.com/robotology/yarp/issues?q=label%3A%22Fixed+in%3A+YARP+v3.8.0%22).


Deprecation and Behaviour Changes
---------------------------------

### `lib_yarp_os`
* Removed old deprecated functions related to the usage of unsafe network data types
  (e.g. asVocab() -> asVocab32(), asInt() -> asInt32(), asDouble -> asFloat64() etc.)


### `Devices`
* device `group` has been removed because of faulty/incomplete implementation and unused. Please use `yarprobotinterface` instead.
* Class `DriverLinkCreator`, used only by device `group`, has been removed.
* device `pipe` has been removed because of faulty/incomplete implementation and unused.
* device `dualGrabber`, previously deprecated, has been removed.
* device `remote_grabber`, previously deprecated, has been removed.


New Features
------------

### Libraries

#### `lib_yarp_companion`
* Added companion command `yarp split`. The command splits an heterogeneous nested bottle received from a port into multiple ports.

#### `lib_yarp_os`
* `yarp::os::LogStream` now can chain instances of `yarp::sig::VectorOf<T>`.

#### `lib_yarp_dev`
* Added method `bool getAxes(int* ax)` to `yarp::dev::IAxisInfo` interface.

#### `bindings`
* yarp bindings: Added corresponding `getAxes()` method to `IAxisInfo` interface + python example.

#### `libYARP_dev_tests`
* A new library `yarp_dev_tests`: is now exported.
  It contains common sources to test Yarp device through `lib_yarpdev` (also outside yarp repo)

#### `libYARP_robotinterface`
* Added support to `${portprefix}` variable in parameters (#2819).


### Devices
* Removed devices `rpLidar`, `rpLidar2`, `rpLidar3`, and the corresponding sdk in `extern/rplidar`.
  The devices can be now found in https://github.com/robotology/yarp-device-rplidar

#### `fakeLaserWithMotor`
* added new device `fakeLaserWithMotor`

#### `rangefinder2D_nwc_yarp`
* added new device `rangefinder2D_nwc_yarp` (including IRangefinder2D tests)

#### `frameTransformServer` + `frameTransformClient`

* Now both `frameTransformClient` and `frameTransformServer` will search for "test" configurations not relying on an absolute path passed as a parameter but will take advantage of `yarp::os::ResourceFinder` using a `file name` and a `context` passed to them in this way:
```
> yarpdev --device frameTransformClient --testxml_from testconfig.xml --testxml_context test_folder
```

### `yarpidl_thrift`
* Improved thrift generator in order to handle default values of the variables declared inside a .thrift file.


### Extern

#### `Catch`
* Migration from `Catch V2.13.8` to `Catch V3.2.1`.

#### `sqlite3`
* Migration from `sqlite` to `sqlite3`. Fixed issue preventing `extern/sqlite3` (i.e. `YARP_priv_SQLite3`) to be correctly found as a dependency by other projects.


### GUIs

#### `yarpview`
* Added the possibility to set a custom title for `yarpview` by passing `--title` + *custom title* to the executable
* If the `title` argument is not passed `yarpview` window title will be assigned as it has been until now

#### `yarpmotorgui`
* Added visualization of motor position when a joint is in hardware fault.
* Improved sliders labels alignment.
* Added a new option to set the number of decimal digits of the slider.


### YCM
* migration from `YCM 0.13` to `YCM 0.15.1`


### Other
* added option `YARP_COMPILE_ALL_FAKE_DEVICES` to build all fake devices in one single shot


### Portmonitors

#### `image_rotation`
* added new portmonitor `image_rotation`


Bug Fixes
---------

### bindings
* `IGazeControl.storeContext()`: now the method is correctly exposed to Python, returning the ID instead of trying to modify a pointer to it.
### devices

#### `ffmpeg_grabber`
* Fixed linking problems on Windows.

#### `AudioRecorderWrapper`
* It now inherits from `yarp::dev::WrapperSingle` instead of `yarp::dev::IMultipleWrapper`

#### `AudioPlayerWrapper`
* It now inherits from `yarp::dev::WrapperSingle` instead of `yarp::dev::IMultipleWrapper`

#### `frameTransformClient`
* Now, if the selected configuration xml file does not include a certain interface, the device is still correctly initialized but that interface won't be available. If a method that involves the missing interface is called, an error will be returned.

#### `controlBoard_nws_yarp`
* Fixed handling of `IRemoteVariables` messages via RPC.
* `RPCMessagesParser`:  several calls to various motor control interfaces have been protected so that
  if an interface is not available in the hardware device (i.e. the view() fails),
  the `controlboardwrapper/yarprobotinterface` does not segfaults.

#### `multipleanalogsensorsremapper`
* Add more verbosity when sensor name is not found.

### Tools

#### `yarprobotinterface`
* `yarprobotinterface`: is now able to parse `enabled_by` and `disabled_by` xml attributes. See  yarprobotinterface Doxygen documentation.

#### Yarp companion
* Fixed yarp command `write` throwing segmentation fault when `argc` was less than 2.

### Integration Tests
* Tests: Added integration tests to check the correct execution of the following commands:
`yarp --version`
`yarpdev --list`
`yarp plugin --all`
* Tests: If no plugins are available, the command `yarp plugin --all` now returns 0 (OK) instead of 1 (ERROR).

Contributors
------------

This is a list of people that contributed to this release (generated from the
git history using `git shortlog -ens --no-merges v3.7.0..v3.8.0`):

```
   185	Marco Randazzo <marco.randazzo@iit.it>
    21	Ettore Landini <ettore.landini@iit.it>
    13	Silvio Traversaro <silvio.traversaro@iit.it>
     6	robotology-bot (Tag Repository Action) <robotology@iit.it>
     5	tumme <davide.tome@iit.it>
     4	Ugo Pattacini <ugo.pattacini@iit.it>
     3	Bartek Łukawski <bwmn.peter@gmail.com>
     3	Nicola Piga <nicola.piga@iit.it>
     3	hypothe <markeagle98@gmail.com>
     1	Marco Gabriele Fedozzi <73471964+hypothe@users.noreply.github.com>
     1	Mattia Fussi <mattia.fussi@iit.it>
     1	fbrand-new <francesco.brand@iit.it>
```
