YARP <yarp-4.0> (UNRELEASED)                                         {#yarp_4_0}
============================

[TOC]

YARP <yarp-4.0.> Release Notes
=============================


A (partial) list of bug fixed and issues resolved in this release can be found
[here](https://github.com/robotology/yarp/issues?q=label%3A%22Fixed+in%3A+YARP+yarp-4.0%22).

New Features
----------------

### Devices

* All nwc devices now use the method checkProtocolVersion() to guarantee network protocol
compatibility with the corresponding nws device.

### libYARP_os

* Added new datatype `yarp::conf::vocab64_t`
* Added folder for thrift-generated messages.

### libYARP_sig

* Added `VectorOf<float>` (32 bit)
* Added markers to `yarp::sig::Sound` (see breaking changes)

### PortMonitors

* Added new PortMonitor `throttleDown` to limit the bandwidth usage over a port connection.
* `Sound Marker` PortMonitor modified to use the the new Markers feature added to `yarp::sig::Sound`.
* Added new PortMonitor `stats_monitor` which provides stats about the connection to which it is attached.
* Added mechanism to concatenate multiple portmonitors. See portmonitors documentation.
* Added environment variable `YARP_CONNECTIONS_STATS_ENABLE` which automatically concatenates a `stats_monitor` on all output connections.

### Guis

* Added new gui `yarpframegrabbergui` to control camera parameters.
* `yarpmotorgui` can now use the option `reduce_bandwidth` to use `throttleDown` PortMonitor to reduce bandwidth usage.
* `yarpmotorgui` now handles the `braked` status from interface `IJointBrake`.

### IDL_Thrift

* improved generator to support services with multiple containers (lists, maps, sets)

### yarpDeviceParamParserGenerator

* Added the directive `#include <filename>` which allows to generate param parsers including multiple .md files. The
  parameters of the various files will be merged all together.

### Yarprobotinterface

* added option `show-device-parameters` (default false).
By default, device parameters are no more displayed by yarprobotinterface in the opening phase.

### Yarpconnectionsstats

* added new executable `yarpconnectionsstats`, a console application which displays in realtime the stats of yarp connections monitored by 
  `stats_monitor`. This allows to detect which connections are using more bandwidth and find bugs, such as wrong carriers.

### libYARP_stats

* A new library used by `stats_monitor` and `yarpconnectionsstats`.

### libYARP_cv

* Added support for OpenCV 5

# Bindings

* Improved bindings examples
* Added bindings for all new interfaces.

Deprecations and removals
---------------------------

### CMake

* Removed support for CMake < 3.22 (CMake 3.22 is the default version included in Ubuntu 22.04)
* Removed support for OpenCV 3, added support for OpenCV 5

### Devices

* Removed deprecated devices `analogWrapper`, `analogSensorClient`
* Removed deprecated device `RGBDSensorClient` (replaced by RGBDSensor_nwc_yarp)

Breaking Changes
----------------

### libYARP_dev

* Major refactor of visual interfaces, i.e.:
 `IRgbVisualParams`,`IFrameGrabberControls`,`IFrameGrabberControlsDC1394`,
 `IRGBDSensor`, `IFrameGrabberImage`.
* Added new interface IJointBrake to control the status of the joint break (if available)
* Improved serialization of `yarp::dev::ReturnValue` (breaking change with yarp 3.x)
* Removed `AudioGrabberVocabs.h`
* Removed class `DeviceDriverResponder`
* Added new control interface `yarp::dev::IVelocityDirect` to control instantaneous joint velocity without any acceleration interpolation/limiter.
  The velocityDirect interfaces was implemented in tests, `fakeMotionControl` Device, `ControlBoardRemapper` Device, NWS/NWC pair devices,
  `IControlMode` interface (added new control mode VOCAB_CM_VELOCITY_DIRECT), `yarpmotorgui` (new item in the control mode combo box)
* Several methods in interfaces such as `IInteractionMode`, `IControlMode` have changed their signature to use enum instead of ints.
* IControlMode` interface now use two different data types to distinguish between `ControlModeEnum` and `SelectableControlModeEnum` which is the
  subset that the user can use:
  `virtual yarp::dev::ReturnValue setControlModeRaw(int j, yarp::dev::SelectableControlModeEnum mode)=0;`
  `virtual yarp::dev::ReturnValue getControlModeRaw(int j, yarp::dev::ControlModeEnum& mode)=0;`
* Several interface methods now use T& instead of T* in getMethods. This allows to distinguish if the return value is a single or an array.
  For example method `virtual yarp::dev::ReturnValue checkMotionDoneRaw(bool& flag)=0;` returns a single bool which is the logical AND
  of the checkMotionDone of all joints of the part. Before, the binding implementation was considering a vector (bug).
* Removed class `DeviceResponder` not used anymore in any devices, replaced by thrift communication.

### Devices

* Updated protocol between `RemoteControlBoard` and `controlBoard_nws_yarp`: the motor `temperature` data is
  now obtained through the streaming port instead of an RPC.
  This new feature is implemented through a breaking change in the definition of data fields in `stateExt.thrift`
* RemoteControlBoard and controlBoard_nws_yarp communicate via thrift. The old protocol via vocabs/bottles have been replaced.
* RemoteControlBoard now implements a parameter `use_streaming`. If set to true (default) some commands (ie. positionDirect, velocityDirect etc)
  are sent via streaming communication (normal behavior). If set to false, all set commands are sent via RPC thrift (debug mode).
  Get commands (encoders etc) are still obtained via stateExt port.
* RemoteControlBoard now asks to the nws which interfaces are implemented by the wrapped device via (`getDeviceInterfacesRPC` RPC method)
  and it is able to return an error if the method is not implemented (the command is check by the nws and not event transmitted to the nws).
  Before, it was impossible to get this information for streaming methods such as `SetPosition`, `velocityMove` simply because the
  streaming method does not have a reply message.
* Updated all devices related to visual interfaces, e.g.:
 `openCVGrabber`,`openCVWriter`,`depthCameraDriver`,`USBcamera`,`fakeDepthCamera`,etc.
* `remote_controlboard` default communication protocol for receiving streaming data is now `fast_tcp` and not `udp`.
* `remote_controlboard` added new param `carrier_cmd` to set a output protocol different from the input one (set by `carrier` parameter)
   default vale for `carrier_cmd` is `fast_tcp`.
* Updated `FakeMotionControl`, `controlBoard_nws_yarp`,`remoteControlBoard`, `controlBoardRemapper`, etc.
  to implemented the new interface `IJointBrake`. Tests added.
* Added `nwc_base_params.md` file which includes parameters used by `yarpDeviceParamParserGenerator` to generate the parameters
  of all nwc devices.
* Removed devices `JoypadControlServer`, `JoypadControlClient`. Fixed `FakeJoypad` device and tests.
  Replaced by devices `JoypadControl_nws_yarp` and `JoypadControl_nwc_yarp` with different new logic and parameters.



### libYARP_sig

* Removed field `topIsLow` from `yarp::sig::Image`

* Improvements to `yarp::sig::Sound`, with markers management directly inside the data type. Added tests.
* Added Sound `utils::mix(const Sound& A, const Sound& B, double percentage)`
* Added the possibility to save markers inside .wav files (+.txt additional file).
* Added `sawtooth` and `squarewave` generator to `yarpAudioPlayer`.
* Template class `yarp::sig::VectorOf` can be now instantiated also with types `short int` and `char` (byte).


### libYARP_os

* Removed classes `yarp::os::Node`,`yarp::os::Nodes`,`yarp::os::Publisher`,`yarp::os::Subscriber`
* Removed ROS1-related management logic in YARP nameserver

### portmonitors

* Several portmonitors have changed the syntax of the their input parameters. In particular `image_compression_ffmpeg`
  now has a completely different format. Check the documentation of each portmonitor and the corresponding
  tests, included in the individual portmonitors folders.

### carriers

#### Portmonitor carrier

* Added python bindings for 'PortMonitor' carrier
* It is now possible to use python code to perform operations on data passing through a yarp connection

### GUIs

#### yarpmanager

* Added support for the new yarp run `batch` refresh call for running processes.
* The GUI checks whether or not it is more costly to run the old refresh call or the new batch one and act accordingly

